Alan Wallace was raised a Christian
in Pasadena, California,
but something in him simply couldn't find
a comfortable place in his world.
As a young adult, he headed for India, not surprisingly,
learned to speak Tibetan with ease,
and became a student of the Dalai Lama,
a relationship that has lasted 37 years.
During his years of deep seclusion and meditation,
Alan began writing on the essential truths about happiness,
including the Buddhist belief that we are not
entitled to happiness.
You've spent many, many years of your life
living in the Buddhist tradition.
How did this originally happen for you?
As I was growing up,
I was, on the one hand raised in a very religious household.
My father's a theologian,
and a lot of religion on both sides of my family tree.
On the one hand.
On the other hand, from a very early age,
age of 13, I was very strongly drawn
to a career in science.
Specifically in biology.
And so as I was growing up, I just felt increasingly
that the whole world view presented by modern science,
especially with its materialistic underpinnings,
was really fundamentally incompatible
with the world view presented every Sunday.
In church.
In church, exactly, yeah.
And I just didn't find anybody at all, frankly,
who could unite these two worlds into one coherent whole,
where the parts really fit in a meaningful
and harmonious fashion.
So by the time I was 20, I'd really pretty well given up.
I figured, "This society's not working for me,"
because I couldn't, like many people can,
I couldn't simply throw out religion lock, stock and barrel,
like, "What a bunch of hooey.
"What a bunch of nonsense and superstition."
I think that is a rather primitive response
to many of the most brilliant minds we've had
in the whole world, not only Western civilization,
have been profoundly religious.
But a common response
for people who are frustrated.
Oh, it's very common.
It's very common, but I think it's rather facile.
I think it's rather facile.
And that is these were not ninnies, you know?
And to brush them off as if we in the 21st century
somehow have such greater insight
strikes me as just being
not very self-critical.
But do you think that perhaps
some of the later interpretations and translations
could have been done by ninnies? (laughs)
Oh, that's for sure,
and is there a lot of ninny-hood in religion?
There's no question about it.
Tomfoolery, idiotic thinking, superstition,
there's no doubt about it,
but to think that somehow science has discredited
everything that comes under the guise of religion,
including something that I've devoted
a great deal of time to exploring,
and that is the empirical elements,
the profound experiential elements of religion.
Namely, contemplative inquiry.
To somehow discount that as if that just...
Whatever experiences arise from very deep,
sometimes years on end, training
to explore the nature of the mind, consciousness,
its origins and so forth,
and to discount that,
after all they're not scientists,
strikes me as about as open minded as any
religious fundamentalist I've ever met.
What I would call it is a kind of a methodolatry.
That the scientific community, especially those working
in the neurosciences, cognitive sciences,
they're methodologies are, frankly, entirely materialistic.
They're trying to understand the mind
exclusively by way of studying it indirectly,
interrogating people, which is physical,
you can record it.
That's a physical act.
Galvanic skin responses, all of it.
Galvanic skin response, EEG, studying behaviour,
studying fMRI and so forth.
All of these are perfectly viable measures,
and they're all materialistic,
but when your methodology is 100% materialistic,
it should go without saying that, of course,
any conclusions you draw about the mind
will be materialistic.
Which is fair enough if that's
what you're interested in doing,
is adopting materialistic methodologies,
knowing full well that you have no alternative
but to draw materialistic conclusions.
If that's what you'e interested in, why not?
It's a free country, and I'm happy for such people,
but then to turn around and say,
"You see, all the evidence points
"to the mind being material,"
or a function of matter, I say,
"Wait a minute, all the material you've garnered,
"because all of your methodologies..."
This is like a Christian trying to find
evidence for God in the Bible.
And then saying, "You see,
"there's no evidence for atheism in the Bible."
Well, if that's your only book,
and that's the only source of authority,
then one can say, "Duh."
Likewise now, we have these modern scientists,
neurobiologists especially,
their only book is the book of physical nature.
It's the only one they ever study,
it's the only book they have any means of reading,
because all of their technologies, all their methodologies
are good for that and good for nothing else.
But then one can say there isn't anything else.
And I would say, "Yes, there is."
Just as there is a way of studying the stars and planets,
apart from studying old books on astrology and so forth.
The way to understand the nature of the origins and so forth
of stars, planets, galaxies, sun and moon, planet Earth,
is, low and behold, observe very closely.
Observation, absolutely.
Observe the phenomena you're trying to understand.
And here we have the mind, states of consciousness,
mental phenomena,
arising from moment to moment to moment.
Using all the instruments of technology,
you can never observe a single mental event.
Not one.
Not even if you had pain in your knee right now.
I mean, that's a pretty primitive kind of thing.
My knee hurts.
Is there any instrument of technology
that can tell us definitively are you lying,
are you telling the truth?
There is no such instrument.
You can find brain events
that are more or less correlated with pain,
but can we say definitively,
from an objective, scientific perspective,
you're lying or you're telling the truth
when you say you have pain in your knee?
And the answer is we don't know.
And so all of these objectively experienced mental events
are invisible to all the means of technology.
And yet our entire life experience
is comprised of nothing but these beliefs and perceptions.
Precisely, precisely.
And, moreover, it is is possible,
and the great contemplative traditions of the world
have been doing this for millennia,
it is possible not only to take a casual glance,
introspectively, and observe one's thoughts and so forth,
rather like folk astronomy,
leaving us at the level of folk psychology,
but it's also, with rigorous training
that sometimes takes years to master,
it is possible to develop a telescope of the mind.
That is, develop very refined attention
that is stable, that is clear,
enhance your metacognitive abilities,
your ability to monitor your own states of consciousness,
and being probing into the deep space of the mind.
Now, this is a truly scientific approach
to the study of the mind,
in the same way that Galileo's approach
to studying the stars and planets and so forth
was truly scientific, it was empirical.
This is a truly empirical and
it is an avenue of inquiry that's completely been neglected,
and I mean 100% neglected,
by all major institutions of the academy,
of scientific institutions and so forth,
of honing the ability to observe the mind.
So I'm gonna come back to your earlier question.
What got me into this,
the initial question, you might recall,
is that I felt there was really something
to the mind and consciousness,
but I also felt that nothing in my background,
I'd studied biology, various branches of science
and so forth, I thought nothing was getting to it.
Back then, in 1970, they were studying rats and pigeons.
It was primarily behavioural,
and really, let's get real,
how much would I ever learn about your emotional life,
if I'm interested in your mind--
Through my pet rat?
Look at your rat, and give it some crumbs,
and see how many times it will
run through a hoop or something.
I mean, it's really rather bizarre, right?
So I felt here's an area,
the nature of the human, if we use a theological term,
the human soul, the human spirit,
human identity, human mind, consciousness.
What is it?
We are somehow conscious.
Isn't this a wondrous event?
And what is the nature of this?
So I wasn't finding it in your mainstream religion.
We know what that's about,
and the contemplative practice basically isn't there.
Very, very rare, back then it was almost non-existent.
Nowhere in psychology or biology, neuroscience,
nowhere to be found.
So I was just basically utterly disenchanted.
I was disenchanted.
Is that when you packed your bags for India?
Precisely.
Well, I packed my bags first if all
just to get out without my parents
going completely ballistic.
I decided, "I'm getting out of here,
"and I'm going to try to do in a legal way,
"or an acceptable way."
So I took my junior year abroad,
that was one of the options at the University of California,
and I went off to Germany.
I was raised partly in Switzerland, I was fluent in German.
I said, "That'll get me out of here, anyway."
But I was really a seeker.
I mean, I was kind of really classic for my era.
This was 1970, and I was just seeking.
I had existential questions, spiritual questions,
but I wasn't willing to discard either
religion or science.
I just felt there's too much depth, too much insight,
in both of these areas.
While there's an enormous amount of dogmatism
in modern science...
I mean, there's absolutely uncritical, unquestioning
absolute non-skeptical embrace of materialism.
Everything has to be boiled down to matter,
which I find, frankly, laughable.
I mean, matter is a human construct.
We didn't discover it, we defined it, you know?
So for us to define a category,
and, frankly, we are the only ones that defined it.
Not nature.
If nature defined it, we would have simply discovered it
a long time and stuck with it.
But the very category of matter has shifted over the last
at least 400 years, since Copernicus.
So here we've created our own category,
which is a human construct,
and now say the entire universe,
13.7 billion years, with maybe 50 to 100 billion galaxies,
all fits into a construct that we here on planet Earth
have devised over the last century or so.
I think give me a break, you know?
Is this ontological pomposity or what?
I just don't get it, but then of course,
there are religious fundamentalists of all sorts,
that feel all of reality fits into our book.
You name the book, but everything important is here,
and these materialists have the book of physical nature
with their categories of the so-called natural,
which they've defined, the physical, which they've defined,
the material, which they define,
and they say all of reality has to fit into this.
I just find that very quaint.
So you then, at some point, obviously,
took off from Germany,
and you headed for...
Did you go to Dharamsala first?
I did a bee line to Dharamsala,
but I had an agenda first, when I was in Germany.
I went to the University of Göttingen for one year.
Before arriving there I was hitchhiking around Europe
for about two months,
and there I was a seeker,
really very searing, very pressing,
urgent questions in my mind.
I was up at a youth hostel up in the Swiss Alps,
where I'd been raised near there,
a number of times, couple of times,
as a small child and an adolescent.
And somebody had left behind a book
on the nature of awareness according to Tibetan Buddhism.
Left behind it, clearly had been abandoned.
A gift?
It was a gift.
So I figured, "Boy, that's got my name on it,"
and I started reading it, and it was like a...
Like bells going off.
This is it, this is it, this is it.
And so I continued hitch hiking around,
hitch hiking up in Norway,
and really thinking I must find a wise old man,
I need some guidance.
Buddhism is the way, but now where's a man?
I need to meet somebody.
And in my 20 year old mind,
I thought it should be a wise old man.
You know, the archetype.
And, lo and behold, I was out there
hitch hiking between Bergen and Oslo up in Norway
and an old man picked me up in his VW Bug.
It turned out he was a Buddhist monk who lived in Nepal,
and he gave me just the guidance I needed.
I went down to Germany and basically dropped
all the courses that I had intended to study or take,
and immediately, on great big hunch,
basically betting my life,
I started studying Tibetan language.
There was a Tibetan Lama there,
appointed by the Dalai Lama.
I became his only student,
and then read voraciously
of the contemplative traditions of the world.
Zen Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity,
anything I could get my hands on,
because I had a question.
I was reading up to eight hours a day,
this was a, "I've got to get clear on this."
And that is not on a doctrinal level,
the institutional level, the political level.
World religions differ all over the place,
in very significant ways, but when we go to
the depths of contemplative insight,
in the Christian, the Buddhist, and so on,
do they converge, or do they diverge,
or are they simply unrelated to each other?
Like, I don't know, fish and apricots.
Just there, you know?
Because I felt that was almost like a geometrical design.
Are they going like this,
are they going like this,
or are they just going like this?
I felt if they diverge, or are just unrelated to each other,
then why should I give credence to any of them?
They're probably just, meditation is probably just
a way of brainwashing yourself to believe or to experience
what you've already taught yourself to believe.
In which case, who cares?
I'll find something else to do.
But if, at the deepest level,
where they seem to be, some of them,
seem to be transcending their own doctrines
and going to an immediacy of experience
that transcends concepts, words, and so forth,
if there appeared to be a profound convergence there,
then my big hunch, that I was willing to bet my life on,
was they're probably converging on the most important truths
human beings have ever encountered.
And that's worth devoting a whole life to.
After a year of study, reading voraciously,
thinking, meditating,
I came to the conclusion,
obviously I didn't know, but
this is going to be my working hypothesis:
there's a profound convergence here.
These are the most important truths
we can ever access, and this is all I want to do.
And a place to go now, since I knew my path
was Tibetan Buddhism.
It just had my name marked on it in some ways.
Then, at the age of 21, after a year in Germany,
I bought myself a one way ticket,
sold or gave away everything I couldn't carry on my back,
and sold my whole camera.
I was rather serious about photography.
Sold all my camera gear to buy a one way ticket to India.
Flew to Bombay, flew from Bombay to Delhi,
got the first train to Pathankot,
got the first bus to Dharamsala,
and I plunked myself down for four years.
And during that time,
was that when you met your teacher?
Yeah, it was.
My teacher in Germany was primarily a language teacher.
The one you write about, Kungo Barshi?
Oh, Kungo Barshi, Kungo Barshi.
He was one of my many teachers, a very dear...
He's still alive, I'm happy to say.
He was one of my many teachers.
What brought me to Dharamsala was,
I was actually living in a monastery in Switzerland
for a couple of months, for a summer,
actually planning to go to Nepal,
because I was imagining I'd find some yogi in a cave,
and I'd become his chela, his disciple,
and I would become enlightened quite quickly.
That was the idea.
I had no interest in academia at all,
I was pretty much burnt out of academia.
It was sterile, dry, didn't go anywhere.
Give me a break, I want to find a yogi.
So I was in this monastery in northern Switzerland,
a little town called Rikon,
and a bulletin arrived from India, from Dharamsala,
saying that just about a month after
I was planning to go to Asia, the fall of 1971,
the Library of Tibetan Works and Archives would be opened
under the auspices of the Dalai Lama
and a one year class would be held for Westerners
who are seriously interested in studying Buddhism.
The Lama that I was studying with in Switzerland
said, "Alan, forget about Nepal.
"You should go here, this is directly under the Dalai Lama.
"You should go there."
So I said, "Okay, whatever."
You know, I had at least enough humility
to listen to what he said.
So I made a bee line for Dharamsala,
and there was a marvellous Tibetan Lama there,
appointed by the Dalai Lama,
so he became my first Lama or teacher
who really taught me a lot.
In the same institute,
this Library of Tibetan Works and Archives,
was this wonderful man Kungo.
He became my Tibetan language teacher,
and then very rapidly,
within a couple of months of my being there,
I met with His Holiness, the Dalai Lama,
and he's really been my principal teacher, mentor,
ever since then.
So that was 37 years ago.
37 years.
Let's start talking about some of what you consider to be
the most essential truths,
and let's talk about the notion of happiness
or a life well lived, since we're at a conference
studying the nature of happiness.
The word in Tibetan is sukha, is that correct?
That's actually Sanskrit.
Sanskrit is sukha, yeah.
The Sanskrit is usually a bit easier to pronounce
for us Americans than Tibetan,
because Sanskrit is an Indo-European language,
so it's got a nice alphabet, and you look at it
and you can read it,
because it sounds like what it looks like.
Right, let's talk about that.
The essential truths that you started seeing intersecting,
as you said, at the inverted pyramid there,
at the bottom of the V,
and what those were, how these truths started evolving
to the surface and the nature
of the study of happiness and that endeavour.
Well, in Western religions,
or, let's say, call them the Abrahamic religions
of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam,
these are really classic, paradigmatic religions.
I think our very notion of what a religion is,
into which we then throw Daoism and Hinduism
and Buddhism and so forth,
but really this category, just, once again, as matter,
energy are categories that human beings have created,
never discovered.
We've defined them.
In a similar fashion, we didn't discover religion.
We human beings, we in the West,
have defined religion according to our constructs,
our framework,
and it's really overwhelmingly defined by the
salient characteristics of the Abrahamic religions.
They start out, I think without exception, really,
with very deep ontological or metaphysical claims
that we cannot readily test by experience.
In the beginning, God created.
In the beginning was the word, the word was made flesh.
There is but one God, and Muhammed is his prophet.
Well, those may be true claims,
but how on earth do we know?
And how on earth do we ever put that
to the test of experience, right?
Buddhism radically doesn't start out that way,
and so, really, what it is worthwhile asking
is it appropriate, is it revealing or more obscuring,
to simply dump Buddhism into the category of religion
that's already been defined
according to three Western religions.
Buddhism doesn't start there.
And I must say it was not because of the deepest claims,
the ultimate nature of awareness or these kind of claims,
that really held me, gripped me, and then inspired me
to want to go deeper and deeper and deeper.
Rather, Buddhism starts with experience.
Experience right now, here and now,
not what happened long ago in the universe,
or what's the ultimate dimension of consciousness,
which of course we can't easily fathom either.
It starts out with here, there's a reality of
let's call it dissatisfaction.
There's that word dukkha.
The dissatisfaction goes from boredom, malaise...
The opposite of sukha.
It's the opposite of sukha,
but it covers a whole bandwidth here.
If you have a little itch on your kneecap.
Oh, that itches, I don't like that.
That would be dukkha.
I don't like it.
That's pretty trivial.
All the way to anguish, to physical torment,
white hot pain.
The whole spectrum is dukkha.
But likewise then we have this corollary term,
the antonym, and that is sukha,
and that's everything from,
"I like that feeling on my cheek," you know, kinda,
to bliss, to ecstasy, to inconceivable sense of well being.
But then this is where Buddhism...
Buddhism starts here and says
well, whether or not you know anything about great bliss
and so forth and so on, all of us,
I think without exception,
we know something about dissatisfaction.
Pain, unhappiness, depression, we know about that.
Nobody needs to teach us.
We don't get through infancy into childhood
without knowing something about pain,
and we don't like it.
Pain, unhappiness, the whole array, we don't like it.
It's almost defined by, "Don't like it."
And so instead of simply avoiding it...
This is what started really getting me,
like, "I'm not leaving."
I mean, I was there on a trial run,
I thought if Buddhism didn't work out,
I'd just head off to New Zealand, become a shepherd.
A rather romantic, probably silly, idea.
I didn't want Western civilization,
if Buddha wound up being a wash out,
then I'd say, "Neither the East nor the West,
"I'm just going to go off to New Zealand and watch sheep."
No, but what kept me there was,
this is potent stuff, and that is take this reality.
The first so-called noble truth is
reality of dissatisfaction, of dukkha, the whole bandwidth,
and instead of simply trying to avoid it,
to dodge it, to suppress it, to blink,
to shirk away from it,
Buddha said, "Here's the reality of suffering.
"Recognize it."
So like a doctor that would.
If you come into the doctor, you say,
"I feel terrible," the doctor would say,
"Well, first tell me all your symptoms.
"Tell me all your symptoms, where do you feel terrible?
"How long," and so forth and so on.
And then when the doctor's got the full set
of symptoms that you can possibly articulate,
having paid close attention,
then he says, "All right,
"now let's do some measurements here."
So open, say ah, the x-ray, whatever it is.
Now let's try to find out what's ailing you,
what are the underlying causes?
Not, "Oh, you feel bad?
"Good, here's an anaesthetic."
Or just whack you over the--
Not much inquiry there.
There you go, just whack you over the frontal cortex,
stun you into oblivion.
No, they don't try to just suppress symptoms,
if they're truly healers,
they try to find out what the causes are,
and then, having identified the causes to the best extent,
then they see is the prognosis one that we might actually
consider a full cure?
If that's a possibility, then you consider, "Well, good.
"How do we go about doing that?"
That is the model of all of Buddhism.
It's called the four noble truths.
There's a reality of suffering,
which we check our experientially,
not taking somebody else's word for it,
so it's not an authority based kind of entry.
Then, what about the causes of suffering?
Well, once again, don't look elsewhere.
Don't ask somebody else,
check in your own experience.
What are the causes of suffering that you experience?
And then you also attend to the people around you
and see if you can identify what is central.
Because almost anything, perhaps anything, could
catalyze unhappiness.
I was with somebody recently who,
it was a really beautiful, sunny day in Santa Barbara,
and he looked at it and became visibly very upset,
and he said, "I hate this weather.
"I hate this weather, it should be cloudy,
"it should be overcast.
"I really hate this weather."
I think, "Whoa," you know?
Sunny day in Santa Barbara in November.
But, you know, for that person at that time,
it was just unpleasant.
It was hot, it was unpleasant, it was dry.
We are having a drought here, after all.
So if a sunny day in Santa Barbara could get you down,
well then what couldn't?
So then we can ask, well, all right,
well almost anything could get me down,
make me miserable and so forth.
But then other people go through tremendous adversity
and they don't become miserable.
So it's clearly not simply you were in the wrong place
at the wrong time,
but people respond differently.
So now let's be like Sherlock Holmes here,
let's be an investigator,
find out what are the essential causes of suffering,
and then see, if you possibly can, or just investigate
are these inner causes?
Because they are inner, after all.
Are they indelibly, intrinsically a part of your own being,
your own mind and so forth?
Are we just wired that way?
is it core to our existence?
Or are these more like a virus, more like an affliction,
something that is obscuring a deeper nature
that is not afflicted?
The Buddhist hypothesis, and this is the way to accept it,
not just as dogma,
the Buddhist hypothesis is, based upon
the Buddha's own experience,
is that we're not made that way.
We're not intrinsically here to suffer, we don't
intrinsically have these causes of suffering within.
So there's the hypothesis.
Take it as a working hypothesis if you're so inclined.
If you're not, have a nice day, find something else to do.
But if you want to take that as a working hypothesis,
that we actually can be healed,
or at least we can suffer a lot less,
and we can find much greater happiness,
then here's a path.
And he laid out the path, and I alluded to this
in my very short presentation today,
as a moderator, it was really short.
But number one, live a wholesome life.
I mean, that's just baseline.
Live a wholesome life.
Don't, with your speech, with your physical behaviour,
don't injure.
It's, you know, the ancient Indian-
Do not cause harm.
Do not cause harm, ahimsa.
Non-injury,
I mean, there's enough misery in the world already.
Illness, aging, natural calamities and so forth and so on,
and to say, "No, we don't have enough suffering,
"I'm gonna go out and be mean to people.
"I'll be abusive, and cheat them,
and betray their confidence and so forth."
What's wrong with you?
Don't we already have enough
that just comes to us by nature?
So living a non-injurious way of life,
and then not stopping there, just to be passive,
but say, "Well, where's an opportunity to be of service?
"When can I do a bit of good?
"Can I alleviate somebody else's suffering?
"Can I bring them some happiness?
"Can I do something for the greater good?
Be a good husband, a good father," and so forth and so on.
That's ethics, that's all of Buddhist ethics.
But I looked at that and say, "Boy, that's refreshing.
"Because that just makes really good sense,
"and I want to do that."
Common sense.
It's common sense, and I really want to do that.
And then we can get specific,
and maybe start looking at, "Well,
"if I behave in such a way,
"if I speak in such and such a way,
"what's the impact?"
And then watch closely.
I may be just speaking kinda mindlessly
and then suddenly find, "Oh, I've hurt somebody's feelings.
"That was rude, that was very thoughtless.
"I was very condescending there.
"They didn't like that."
Then we start to see, oh, it's not that God said so,
or Buddha said so, but I spoke in such and such a way,
or I physically behave in such and such a way,
somebody got hurt.
So mindfulness, then, comes in.
Exactly.
You can't have any really meaningful ethics
without being attentive.
Mindful not only of what the behaviour is,
not just from moment to moment to moment,
but observing from moment to moment I behave
and then, moments later, maybe a week later,
maybe a month later, you see, "Oh,
"I had no idea that I hurt you with that comment.
"I'm so sorry."
And that takes humility to do that,
for some people.
It's very difficult to say, for many, "I'm sorry."
A good does of honesty is a good start,
just seeing clearly,
and then when we see that we've truly erred...
I mean, if it we did it maliciously, we really wanted to
harm somebody, then that's that,
and then now look at malice.
Is malice something conducive to your own well being?
Does is make you happy?
Is there a sense of fulfilment, of contentment and so forth
being a malicious person?
It's not being judgemental here, or moralistic
in some kind of pious way,
it's just saying, "You want to be happy?
"Malice is not very compatible with that."
Not very useful.
Not very useful, and in fact,
quite to the contrary.
Mindfulness, in this regard, is integral to ethics,
and ethics becomes an ongoing,
I would almost say adventure.
Because it's not like I had a list of ten don'ts.
Your ten commandments.
Ten commandments, we have them.
We have ten non-virtues in Buddhism.
But just saying, "I made it through the day,
"I didn't commit any of the ten.
"I've been a good boy, I've been a good boy scout,
"give me a merit badge."
That's a boring approach to ethics,
but now on the path to spiritual awakening,
then ethics becomes more and more challenging.
We fine tune it, we fine tune it, we fine tune it
as we attend more and more closely
what types of behaviour gives rise to unrest,
disequilibrium, conflict within my own mind,
conflict in my relationship with others,
unhappiness, discord for other people,
and we mustn't neglect,
it's not always just with other sentient beings,
human animals, but also the environment.
There is unethical behaviour with regard to the environment.
How do we treat our natural resources?
The air, the water, the soil, and so forth.
This is ethical, this is a matter of ethics.
This becomes, really, one could say a science of ethics,
an adventure of ethics.
How should we individually and collectively behave
such that our conduct is not injurious to the environment,
that we're offering to the next generation,
when we pass away, an environment that is at least
as conducive for human flourishing
and the flourishing of the biodiversity on our planet
as the one we recieved.
That is ethical.
We've not been living up to that one very well.
No, we have not done well.
Now, what about more subtle factors,
such as the notion of having
very strong personal preferences?
I think many people suffer because of their attachment
to their own strong personal preferences.
Sure.
How does this come in?
It's just a little more subtle level of learning,
once you pass on the malice and so forth.
Sure, sure.
Well, there's this kind of entry level,
which is an absolutely indispensable foundation,
living ethically.
So whatever your preferences are and so forth,
more subtle issues, at least do no harm.
At least that, you know.
And then if you can spiritual on top of that,
if you want to meditate, or you want to go
into subtler dimensions, that's all very well,
but in the mean time at least don't do any harm here.
And then we move into this area of self centered desires.
Self centered desires, and then as soon as I have
a self centered desire and sometime gets in the way,
then I have a self centered anger,
or I have a self centered desire that doesn't happen,
and then somebody dishes that up,
or maybe just reality dishes it up,
I get angry at reality?
Which is not a very good idea.
And so there, once again, now we're working
not so much on behaviour, but now how the mind functions.
This is what I was alluding to earlier today
when I spoke of equality of well being,
foundationally, that arises from leading
an ethical way of life,
so you can die without remorse.
You have a sense of blamelessness that
I didn't do much damage, and I really tried to
do some good where I could.
Good foundation.
But then there's a whole other level of well being.
And all of this, I must say, gradually
dawned on me during these early years that I was training,
very intensively, from the early '70s,
in Dharamsala.
But then there's another whole dimension of well being
that comes not simply how we conduct ourselves,
by way of speech and by physical behaviour,
but now the actual cultivation of the mind,
and recognizing I can sit in a room all by myself
and make myself utterly miserable.
I can also... There are yogis,
there are others, who can sit all by themselves in a room
and be utterly content,
and actually experience bliss.
And not only in isolation, as if they just
have a high dopamine level or something like that,
but a profound sense of connectedness.
The Dalai Lama was asked once whether he ever feels lonely.
Here he is, you know, he's had a very unusual life.
He said, "No, I never feel lonely.
"Whether I am with others or whether I'm in solitude,
"I always feel a sense of connectedness."
The sense of empathy, the sense of caring
for the greater world,
even if you're spending some time in solitude.
So there's a whole arena there, a whole domain
of meditative practice that we call samadhi,
or we can call, more broadly, meditation.
It's not something esoteric or occultish
or paranormal or weird.
The cultivation of the mind is specifically
recognizing those tendencies in the mind, those impulses,
that are destructive to our own and others' well being,
and those tendencies that are conducive
to our own and others' well being,
and then, just like a gardener coming into a field,
a field of one's own mind,
then seeing how can I gradually weed out,
at least not feed, gradually weed out
the tendencies of pettiness, selfishness,
arrogance, sarcasm, condescension, and so forth.
Gradually weed those out, not by just sheer muscle power,
but by understanding and by attending closely
to the needs of others, their yearnings,
their hopes and fears.
A lot of those just get washed out.
And then attending to, like your vegetable garden,
what are these tendencies and impulses
in my heart and mind that are truly conducive
to my own and others' well being,
and cultivating those.
So that's this whole realm
of the cultivation of the heart and mind
that we call meditation.
It's not just something for religious people,
because it's not just religious people who have
the inner causes of suffering,
the inner causes of happiness.
It's really anybody.
So, frankly, if I were asked,
"Do you think everybody should meditate?"
My answer would be yes.
Now, should everybody be Buddhist?
No.
And this is where the preferences...
Let's put a positive spin on preferences.
And that is, the Dalai Lama's made this point many times,
and I am very much a student of his,
I agree with him entirely on this point.
That it is not a Buddhist ideal, never has been,
that somehow we can be clever enough,
persuasive enough, powerful enough,
that if we could convert everybody to Buddhism,
now that would be really great.
It's never been an idea in Buddhism, ever.
Because it's not the most appropriate
or beneficial path for everybody.
There are some people for whom
Christianity speaks to the heart,
it speaks to the mind, it fills them with inspiration.
This is absolutely where they gravitate to.
It is their path.
Let me ask a question at this point.
With the Tibetan faith,
or the Tibetan practice,
there is a belief or an understanding that this is a wheel,
this is a wheel of life.
To incarnate, and to incarnate again,
and this is very much a part of the Dalai Lama's path,
and all great Lamas.
So might it be that a person is finding their preference,
as you say, in a positive way,
for a given religion as a result of this conditioning
from other times in carrying this forward,
out of familiarity, even?
I think it's a very good question,
and I will speak, of course, from the Buddhist perspective,
that's how it's couched, so.
The answer is definitely yes.
And I look at myself.
I never felt really at home in the Christian world view,
that Christ was the only son of God,
this is the one true faith and so forth,
and all the other religions, well,
it kind of didn't really make it.
Or we've heard recently just from the pope,
saying he's kind of rather skeptical about the whole notion
of interfaith dialogue
as if you should somehow bracket your beliefs.
I think he really does believe there's only one true faith,
and so if we're going to have interfaith dialogue,
well, would you like to know what the truth is?
I'll tell you what the truth is.
It's my faith, not your faith.
He's a very intelligent man, and there are many Christians
who are likewise, has great integrity,
great intelligence.
I just can't go that way,
any more than, and this is a strong parallel,
any more than I can think, could even imagine,
that there's only one way to know reality,
and that's by way of modern science and technology.
I think, "I've heard that one before,
"I rejected that when I was 13,
"and I'm rejecting now at the age of 58."
There is no one true way to truth.
I've never believed that,
and I just think it's provincial, closed minded thinking
whoever does it, whether it's materialists
or whether it's dogmatic religious people.
So the diversity, the multiple perspectives,
and from a religious perspective,
I look at myself.
Here I was a fish out of water.
I couldn't just become a scientist.
I thought, "That's gonna be a barren wasteland for me.
"I'm looking for meaning and it does not deliver."
Then I looked at religion, and that particular motif,
it just doesn't resonate, it doesn't make any sense
that I should follow Christianity
because I was born in Pasadena,
whereas if I were born in, let's say, Baghdad,
I would be a Muslim.
If I were born in Jerusalem I'd be...
I'm supposed to follow something
because of where I was born?
And say that's the one true faith,
because I was born in this place?
I think, "Wait a minute.
"I can't do that, that's ridiculous."
I got the truth right because I was born in the right place?
Give me a break, that just doesn't make any sense.
So I look at myself, and there I was,
disoriented, frustrated, disenchanted,
not finding anything I could connect with.
I pick up one book on Tibetan Buddhism.
And your life does an about face.
And it was no return.
It was just no return, this is it.
I will make any sacrifice,
and I made large sacrifices.
This is it, this is utterly it,
and I will carry on through.
I find it was very easy to learn Tibetan.
I learned it very rapidly,
my pronunciation's very good,
rather like a Tibetan,
and I've felt at home ever since.
Interesting.
Have you any idea why you chose to incarnate
in Pasadena, into a Christian family,
into a Caucasian body?
I certainly make no claims to clairvoyance,
but if I should try to,
more just in terms of...
Your own feeling.
My own feeling, yeah,
so there makes no esoteric claims.
I did have a sense very early on,
that is, from the age of 20, when I encountered Buddhism,
that I felt I'm here to be of service
and try to bring clarity where I think there's
a lot of muddledness.
I've never had the motivation,
in fact, I have rather an antipathy towards the notion
of going out there and being an evangelist.
You know, "Here's my way,
"I have to get you to believe with me.
"Come on, let's gather the flock,
"everybody believe with me."
I find that repugnant.
On the other hand, as you saw me speaking this morning,
I speak with a lot of enthusiasm.
But it never had a notion of, "Now convert to my beliefs,"
but the enthusiasm to dealing open mindedly,
and empirically, and pragmatically
with really important questions.
I think the type of meditations and theories that I teach
can be, they have been, on occasion,
very helpful for Christians,
and I've had a number of students...
When I was teaching at the University of California,
Santa Barbara, I had a number of students.
One young man just attended a course
that I took on Tibetan Buddhism.
He came to me afterwards and he said, "Professor Wallace,
"I found this course marvelous.
"I has really deepened my faith in Christianity."
He was planning to become a priest.
And there was no sarcasm here,
like, "What you taught was such hogwash,
"now I really believe in what I'm doing,"
but rather I was grappling with the issues,
encouraging him to do so as well,
and there he was, emboldened in his own faith,
with an appreciation of Buddhism.
It wasn't his path, but he said,
"Boy, they're really grappling with good issues,
"and I am too, and I'm following the Christian route."
Another one who was training to become a rabbit
told me the same thing.
That's marvelous,
now you've gotten people to think.
That's what makes me happy.
Yes, I can understand that.
And if they don't want to go into any religion,
that's okay.
I'm down on dogmatic thinking,
I'm down of closed minded thinking,
I'm down on the attitude of thinking,
"We have the only way, and if you don't agree with us,
"you're just stupid, or your ignorant."
And I've heard that from materialists,
I've heard that from religious people,
I've heard it from philosophers.
I've heard it from people who have political convictions.
"If you're not a Democrat, you're stupid."
"If you're not a Republican, you're just stupid."
I just can't go that way.
Intelligent.
What about this, since we were talking about happiness,
you were talking about happiness in this panel today,
and back to that.
Obviously, people have been able to gawk
that you did go back and further your education,
because you have your PhD,
and you teach at Stanford, right?
No, I taught at UC Santa Barbara.
UC Santa Barbara, right.
Sorry about that.
In religious studies,
and one of the things that you were saying
towards the end of your talk today
that I found intriguing is that,
in Buddhism, there is no belief
that we have the right to be happy.
What does that mean exactly?
Well, the very notion of a right, this is very theistic.
It's coming out of our civilization,
that's one of our babies,
and it is a notion of a kind of a God given right.
I mean, it's right there in the constitution
whether they were Christian or whether they were deists,
as in Thomas Jefferson and so forth.
Nevertheless, that we were so created,
bear in mind, this is before Darwin ever came along,
that we human beings were so created
that we have certain rights,
God given rights.
That phrase kind of rings a bell, doesn't it?
And God designed the whole shebang,
this is his baby, he created us in it,
and he imbued us with certain rights,
and also thou shalt not.
"If you behave, I'll reward you,
"and if you don't, well, I'm gonna punish you."
So there it is, that's core to the Abrahamic religions,
all of them.
Buddhism doesn't even start there, and never goes there.
Buddhism says not, "In the beginning,
"God created the heavens and the Earth,"
but rather, "There is suffering.
"Take a look at it."
That doesn't make any allusion to God at all,
and it doesn't, also, make any allusion to past lives
or metaphysical issues.
There it is, so it brings us back to experience,
rather than taking us out of experience into some dogma.
And frankly, I think that's what materialism does.
Here we are, as you said earlier,
that our experience is 100% subjective.
100% subjective.
But I appear to you as a human being and so forth,
well, really all that's here is a brain.
And all this here is brain chemistry,
and so now I'm inviting you to come out of your experience
to me, as a human being with your own subjective impressions
and so forth,
and say, "Well, no, if you really want to know about me,
just do some brain scans and take my blood type,
and brain chemistry, and how much EEG..."
It's taking you out of experience.
This is what I find so ironic
is that this whole physical world,
which is the ultimate thing, the only thing
that's really real for the materialist
we've never actually seen it directly.
As I'm gazing over at your form here,
what I'm getting, of course, is visual impressions.
If I should touch you, I'll just touch the paper,
it'd be something like that,
I'm getting tactile impressions, right?
I hear your voice, I've got an auditory impression.
These are called qualia, these are
the immediate contents of experience.
They're not made out of matter.
The colours that I see are not made
out of molecules or atoms,
their not made out of fields or particles.
They're still perceptions.
No, and so this whole physical world,
that everything's supposed to boil down to the physical,
it is as metaphysical as somebody believing
everything is the will of God.
But, by the way, you never see God, right?
This is everything boils down to matter,
except, by the way, you never see matter,
because all you ever see are the data
produced by your systems of measurement,
and, sooner or later, the buck has to come back here.
It has to be in terms of your own first person experience,
and first person experience is not material.
So it's really quite wonderful, you know,
that what they believe in so passionately
is as invisible to them as God is
to the devout religious believer.
And Buddhism says neither the twixt nor the twain.
We're not gonna load the whole burden of reality
on some invisible God.
Nor will we load the whole burden of reality
on some invisible physical world,
by the way, we define physical,
but rather, just come back to experience.
It's called, in German, the Lebenswelt,
the world of lived experience, the lived world.
And there we are, and it doesn't boil down
to any one category.
To say everything is mind?
I don't think so.
A kneecap is not made out of mind.
Clearly there are molecules there,
but to say, "It's only molecules,"
well, then what about my emotions?
My emotions are molecules?
What leap of faith do I have to make to
draw that conclusion?
And I'm just not in to making leaps of faith.
Let's just come back to experience.
If you follow this line in terms of Western thinking,
I would say I'm closest to William James.
A radical empiricist,
and he was very skeptical about materialism,
which, of course, I am,
but he was also very skeptical about religion.
And, to a large extent, I am as well.
Where I have confidence in Buddhism,
there was no one day where suddenly, like,
"I'm a believer," you know?
And then just suddenly accepted a whole bunch of doctrine.
That day never took place.
It's been a process of self discovery,
it sounds like, for 37 years.
It has. It really has.
It never ends.
I don't know if it ever will end,
but it certainly hasn't yet.
And so the questing goes on.
A very dynamic, happy uncertainty.
So the question came up today,
it was very interesting, in the second panel,
about the tolerance for ambiguity and uncertainty.
I think that was a crucial point,
and I think dogmatists,
whether they're materialistic dogmatists
or religious dogmatists,
those people who are just absolutely confident they're right
and just can't even imagine that they're not.
Who of us can really say we know, you know?
With that type of absolute empirical certainty.
I think precious few.
So where is all this hubris of all this,
"This is just the facts, just the facts,"
and we have to just live with the facts,
whether they're depressing or not?
I think this is simply a character type,
a personality type.
An intolerance for ambiguity,
an intolerance for uncertainty,
and I think I have a rather large tolerance for that,
because I like it, because that keeps me active,
keeps me questing, keeps me want to engage,
and keeps me wanting to go-
Keeps you open.
Keeps me open, and also
it keeps me wanting to go back to the laboratory
of my meditation hut and explore it,
come back, not to you just brainwash myself
in Buddhist doctrine,
but say, "Look, I have a front row seat on my own mind."
States of consciousness.
And so I've spent about four years in solitude
just probing into the nature of the mind,
trying to explore as well as I can,
understand the nature of consciousness,
and inspired by and based upon experiences,
I have some pretty strong convictions now.
But they could be wrong.
But I'm not gonna just keel over
because a whole bunch of materialists have lined up
like a herd of lemmings and said,
"We all agree, why don't you?"
I say, "Well, I know you all agree,
"but then people have agreed on all kinds of
"mistaken notions over the years.
"Show me the empirical evidence."
If we want to understand something,
observe it carefully, and don't just observe things
that are somehow correlated with it.
Physical behaviour is correlated with mental states,
but they're not mental states.
Brain processes, neurons, dendrites, synapses and so forth,
clearly this is a great science.
Cognitive science is a marvellous science,
and they're studying things that are
correlated with mental events,
but they are not observing mental events directly.
The only people who are really good at it
are the ones who, like a neuroscientist has years
of professional training,
are people who have years of professional training
of directly observing the mind.
And so by the time, if that day comes
when professional training in the first person observation.
experimentation, and investigation of the mind
is incorporated into the modern mind sciences,
that's the day I'm gonna click my heels three times
and say, "Yippee."
For more on Alan's work, you can pick up a copy
of one of his seven books,
including his most recent work,
which is "The Really Hard Problem:
"Meaning in a Material World".
You can find these through any major booksellers.
If you'd like to follow further strands along this line,
you would also likely enjoy our interviews
with Peter Russell.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(soft ambient music)